From single-celled sales sheets all the ways up
to complex ecosystems that relay on interdependent
relationships among products, businesses and customers,
the evolution of marketing is quite a tale.

It gets even more impressive when you think about
the fact that this process of natural selection
has noly been going on for just a little over a 
century.

The Evolution of Marketing: A 120-Year History

While there are different schools of marketing 
thought in terms of the origin of the discipline
and its various phases, the dawn of the 20th century
is a good starting point for our purpose.

Over the past 12 decades, marketing has gone from
the simple act of informing potential consumers
about the existence of a certain product to a complex
web of interactions that take place in person,
through print, over the airwaves and on social media.

What Is the Evolution of Marketing?

Marketing evolution refers to the distinct phases
the businesses have gone through as they continued 
to seek new adn innovative ways to achieve, maintain 
and increase revenue through customer sales and
partnerships. Since the 1900s, a variety of 
different strategies have been employed as various 
industries created and refined their marketing approaches.

When Did the Marketing Discipline Begin?

The answer to this question is fairly nuanced. 
To get a rough sense of the origins of marketing,
let's turn to the Online Etymology Dictionary.
The authors trace this term back to the 1560s, 
when it was used to describe "buying and selling,
the act of transacting business in a market." That
is a pretty literal definition, but it's a good 
reminder that prior to the creation of marketing
concepts, "marketing" still existed. It was just
a pretty straightforward activity.

According to our dictionary, the first cited use
of the word "marketing" in its modern business sense
--the "process of moving goods from producer to 
consumer with an emphasis on advertising and sales"
--comes from 1897.

While it took some time for the field to move from 
a product-centric approach to what we understand as 
a marketing orientation today, the roots of this discipline
go back to the turn of the 20th century.

What Causes Marketing To Evolve?

Two central factors drive marketing evolution:

1. Marketing technology: When the field began,
illustrated print advertising was one of the only
feasible communication channels available to marketers
besides in-store merchandising and in-person interactions.
Today, digital marketing leverages technologies
ranging from multimedia text messages to email 
and more.
2. Customer needs: What do consumers demand today 
what they didn't yesterday? What can they afford
now that was beyond their reach in the past? If 
you can not keep up with your audience, your
competitors definitely will.

What Are the Different Stages in the Evolution of Marketing?

For our purpose, we will discuss four distinct 
phases of marketing evolution. While experts are
somewhat divided in their interpretations of the various strategies
that marketers have used to connect products with 
consumers and vice versa, we think these are the 
most important steps to study:

1. Production orientation
2. Sales orientation
3. Marketing orientation
4. Relationships orientation

The Production Era: Products Develop From the Primordial Soup

The industrial Revolution set the stage for modern marketing.
All of the right ingredients were amassed, resulting in marketing
as we now know it: the promotion of mass-produced consumer products.


